docs: remove TODOs from Static vs Normal Queries to focus more on internals (#19219)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/docs/static-vs-normal-queries.md

title: Static vs Normal Queries
---

> Gatsby handles 3 varieties of GraphQL queries: Page queries (sometimes for simplicity referred to as "normal queries"), static queries using the `<StaticQuery />` component, and static queries using the `useStaticQuery` hook.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gatsby handles three varieties of GraphQL queries: Page queries (sometimes for simplicity referred to as "normal queries"), static queries using the `<StaticQuery />` component, and static queries using the `useStaticQuery` hook.
```

## Differences between varieties of GraphQL queries

> Static queries differ from Gatsby page queries in a number of ways. Gatsby is capable of handling queries with variables for pages because of its awareness of page context while generating them, and **page queries can only be made in top-level page components**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Static queries differ from Gatsby page queries in a number of ways. For pages, Gatsby is capable of handling queries with variables because of its awareness of page context. However, **page queries can only be made in top-level page components**.
```

Reviewer: Overall, this is really helpful context for understanding the differences.
Feel free to disagree with the edits, it just felt a bit more readable this way.
I also wonder what we can do to better define "page context"?

> Doing the same for queries inside of specific components lower in the component tree is not yet possible, which is where static queries are used. Data fetched with a static query won't be dynamic (i.e. **they can't use variables**, hence the name "static" query), but they can be called at any level in the component tree.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In contrast, static queries do not take variables. This is because static queries are used inside specific components, and can appear lower in the component tree. Data fetched with a static query won't be dynamic (i.e. **they can't use variables**, hence the name "static" query), but they can be called at any level in the component tree.
```

>
> You can help by making a PR to [update this documentation](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/issues/14228).

> Static queries differ from the normal Gatsby page queries in a number of ways. One example is that Gatsby is capable of handling queries with variables for pages because of it's awareness of pages while generating them. Doing the same for queries inside of specific components is not yet possible, which is where static queries are used. That means data fetched won't be dynamic (hence the name "static" query).

Reviewer 2: This is a confusing paragraph. Maybe it would be more clear with some examples?
```suggestion
Static queries differ from Gatsby page queries in a number of ways. One example is that Gatsby is capable of handling queries with variables for pages because of its awareness of page context while generating them. Doing the same for queries inside of specific components is not yet possible, which is where static queries are used. That means data fetched won't be dynamic (hence the name "static" query).
```

> _For more information on the practical differences in usage between static and normal queries, refer to the guide on [static query](/docs/static-query/#how-staticquery-differs-from-page-query), this guide discusses the differences in how they are handled internally by Gatsby_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
_For more information on the practical differences in usage between static and normal queries, refer to the guide on [static query](/docs/static-query/#how-staticquery-differs-from-page-query). This guide discusses the implementation differences in how they are handled internally by Gatsby_
```

> ## The `staticQueryComponents` and `components` redux stores

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## The `staticQueryComponents` and `components` Redux stores
```

> Gatsby stores the queries from your site in redux stores called `components` and `staticQueryComponents`. This process and a flowchart illustrating it are explained in the [query extraction](/docs/query-extraction/#store-queries-in-redux) guide.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Gatsby stores the queries from your site in Redux stores called `components` and `staticQueryComponents`. This process and a flowchart illustrating it are explained in the [query extraction](/docs/query-extraction/#store-queries-in-redux) guide.
```

> The redux `staticQueryComponents` is a `Map` from component jsonName to StaticQueryObject. An example entry in that data structure looks like this:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The redux `staticQueryComponents` is a `Map` from component `jsonName` to `StaticQueryObject`. An example entry in that data structure looks like this:
```

> The redux `staticQueryComponents` is a `Map` from component `jsonName` to `StaticQueryObject`. An example entry in that data structure looks like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Redux, `staticQueryComponents` is a `Map` from component `jsonName` to `StaticQueryObject`. An example entry in that data structure looks like this:
```

}
```

In the example above, `blog-2018-07-17-announcing-gatsby-preview-995` is the key, with the object as its value in the `Map`.

The `staticQueryComponents` Redux namespace watches for updates to queries while you are developing, and adds new data to your cache when queries change.

## Replacing queries with JSON imports

> With the final build, there isn't a GraphQL server running to query for data. Gatsby has already [extracted](/docs/query-extraction/) and [run](/docs/query-execution/) the queries, [storing](/docs/query-execution/#save-query-results-to-redux-and-disk) them in files based on hashes in `/public/static/d/<hash>.json`. It can now remove code for GraphQL queries, because there isn't a server it can query against and the data is already available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the final build, there isn't a GraphQL server running to query for data. Gatsby has already [extracted](/docs/query-extraction/) and [run](/docs/query-execution/) the queries, [storing](/docs/query-execution/#save-query-results-to-redux-and-disk) them in files based on hashes in `/public/static/d/<hash>.json`. It can now remove code for GraphQL queries, because the data is already available.
```

### Distinguishing between static and normal queries

> Babel traverses all of your source code looking for queries during query extraction, in order for Gatsby to handle static and normal queries differently, it looks for 3 specific cases in [`babel-plugin-remove-graphql-queries`](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/blob/master/packages/babel-plugin-remove-graphql-queries/src/index.js):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Babel traverses all of your source code looking for queries during query extraction. In order for Gatsby to handle static and normal queries differently, it looks for 3 specific cases in [`babel-plugin-remove-graphql-queries`](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/blob/master/packages/babel-plugin-remove-graphql-queries/src/index.js):
```

1. JSX nodes with the name `StaticQuery`
2. Calls to functions with the name `useStaticQuery`
3. Tagged template expressions using the `gql` tag

### Adding imports for page data

> Code specific for querying with GraphQL is no longer relevant and can be swapped out.

Reviewer: Is a word missing here? I'm not sure what this is saying.

Author: Yeah this is a little terse, here's a suggestion:

```suggestion
Code that is specific for querying the GraphQL server set up during build time is no longer relevant, and can be swapped out in exchange for the JSON data that has been extracted for each query.
```

> A static query written in a component with the `useStaticQuery` hook like this:

Reviewer: Not sure what the transition here is? Maybe a brief introduction about this being an example?

Author: ```suggestion
The imports and query declarations are changed to imports for the JSON that correspond to the query result that Gatsby found when it ran the query. Consider the following component with with a static query written using the `useStaticQuery` hook:
```

```jsx
import { useStaticQuery, graphql } from "gatsby"

export () => {
  const data = useStaticQuery(graphql`
      siteMetadata {
        site {
            title
        }
      }
  `)
  return (
    <h1>
        {data.siteMetadata.site.title}
    </h1>
  )
}
```

> Will have the query string removed and replaced with an import for the JSON file created and named with its specific hash. The Redux stores tracking the queries link the correct data to the page they correspond to.

Author: ```suggestion
This component will have the query string removed and replaced with an import for the JSON file created and named with its specific hash. The Redux stores tracking the queries link the correct data to the page they correspond to.
```

}
```

In the example above, `blog-2018-07-17-announcing-gatsby-preview-995` is the key, with the object as its value in the `Map`.

> The `staticQueryComponents` redux namespace is owned by the `static-query-components.js` reducer which reacts to `REPLACE_STATIC_QUERY` actions. It is created in `query-watcher.js` and is called in [`websocket-manager.js`](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/blob/610b5812a815f9ecff422e9087c851cd103c8e7e/packages/gatsby/src/utils/websocket-manager.js#L85) to watch for updates to querys while you are developing, and add new data to your cache when queries change.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `staticQueryComponents` Redux namespace is owned by the `static-query-components.js` reducer which reacts to `REPLACE_STATIC_QUERY` actions. It is created in `query-watcher.js` and called in [`websocket-manager.js`](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/blob/610b5812a815f9ecff422e9087c851cd103c8e7e/packages/gatsby/src/utils/websocket-manager.js#L85) to watch for updates to queries while you are developing, and add new data to your cache when queries change.
```

> ## Other related internal methods used static queries

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Other related internal methods using static queries
```
Does that work better?

The `getQueriesSnapshot` function returns a `Map` with a snapshot of both the `staticQueryComponents` and `components` that holds all queries from Redux to watch.

> The `handleComponentsWithRemovedQueries` function removes static queries from Redux when they no longer have a query associated with them, which is derived from any staticQueryComponent which doesn't have a `componentPath` on it.

Reviewer 2: This is a pretty awkward sentence, and I'm not sure how to improve it.
```suggestion
The `handleComponentsWithRemovedQueries` function removes static queries from Redux when they no longer have a query associated with them. This derives from any staticQueryComponent which doesn't have a `componentPath` on it.
```
